---
title: "Planetary Atmospheric Spectrum Retrieval based on Machine Learning"
collection: research
permalink: /research/PASRML

type: "Course Project"
venue: School of Physics, Peking University
start_date: 2024-11-01
end_date: 2024-12-30
location: Beijing, China
#advisor: Jun Yang
highlights:
    - Course project for Numerical Simulation and AI Forecast of Geophysics Fluids
    - Engineered a comprehensive synthetic dataset of planetary emission spectra for model training and validation using the pyratbay radiative transfer model
    - Designed, trained, and benchmarked six distinct machine learning architectures (including Linear Regression, MLP,CNNs, and Transformer) to comparatively analyze their performance in retrieving atmospheric composition and profiles
#excerpt: "this is the excerpt"
share: false
---

- Engineered a comprehensive synthetic dataset of planetary emission spectra for model training and validation using the pyratbay radiative transfer model
- Designed, trained, and benchmarked six distinct machine learning architectures (including Linear Regression, MLP,CNNs, and Transformer) to comparatively analyze their performance in retrieving atmospheric composition and profiles

This project was a course project for the course "Numerical Simulation and AI Forecast of Geophysical Fluids", with the lecturers being Prof. Qiu Yang and Prof. Xinyu Wen.

Motivation: It is in principle easy to calculate the transmission and emission spectrum given the atmospheric profile and components based on the theory of radiative transfer. However, the inverse process, which is to retrieve the atmospheric thermodynamic structure and compositions from observed spectrum, turns out to be way harder, as the relation between spectrum and atmospheric status is highly nonlinear. AI is apparently an effective way to deal with nonlinear relations, thus it is interesting to utilize the ability of AI to address this problem.

Method: The method can be devided into two parts, i.e. the data preparation and the model training.

Data Preparation: In order to train AI models properly, a dataset with high quality and large number of samples is needed. However, it is difficult to find such dataset. Thus, I decided to generate my own dataset for subsequent AI training process.

The radiative transfer model I chose was pyratbay. This is a model used in astronomy community to calculate transmission and emission spectrum based on given atmosphere profile and composition.

I installed the package on the cluster, and generated ...... set of samples. To generate a single set of data, I had to first assign the configuration file of the atmospheric profile, generate the atmospheric profile using the configuration file, then assign the configuration file for spectrum calculation and run it to get the spectrum. As this is a rather tedious process, I wrote python scripts to randomly generate the configuration file, and batch processing shell scripts to perform the data generation on the cluster.

For the atmosphere profile, I used the ...... model that is inherent in the model (because apparently using a isothermal profile wil give you the trivial blackbody spectrum). For the atmospheric composition, I selected 18 gases, and defined ... of them as major gases, and the other ... as minor gases.

Model Training: I tried 6 models in total: Linear Regression, Random Forest, MLP, 1D CNN, 2D CNN, Transformer.
